[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
[Applause]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLocks podcast. I'm Jill Wisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway. Tracy, I don't
know this for sure, but I kind of have
this feeling that there's a bit of a
fantasy perhaps on the part of Americans
or the administration or so forth that
in this trade war that non-China Asian
countries, they could be our partner.
They could be our big trading partner
and that somehow China could be isolated
from them.
>> Maybe. I mean, I know there's a lot of
concern about Chinese goods basically
flowing over the border into places like
Vietnam. So I think it's a little bit
more nuanced than that. You know, one
thing I find really funny and my
definition of fun might differ to a lot
of other people's, but you know, if you
look at the real exchange rate,
>> Yeah.
>> so currency adjusted for inflation and
stuff like that,
>> the real effective exchange rate for the
dollar is up like 20%
since January. And the real effective
rate for the UN, the Chinese UN, is down
14%. So if you're trying to like make
your own goods competitive, American
goods competitive, it feels like we're
heading in the opposite direction.
>> Wait, isn't that really true that even
with the nominal the massive nominal
decline in the US dollar against all
these currencies that on a real basis
to Bank of America,
>> huh, that's pretty crazy. I would not
have I certainly would not have guessed
that. And also this sort of gets back to
the point that like with the tariffs and
with the trade war, I still don't know
what the goal is. And it changes a lot.
I don't know the degree to which any of
it was successful, but under the Biden
administration, I had some sense of
okay, we had the specific goal with
trade policy and other tech transfer
policies to be at or near or ahead of
the frontier of cutting edge in a
certain key areas. And when it comes to
trade policy under this administration,
it strikes me as all over the map.
>> Yeah. So there's the question obviously
of whether the US needs to be
manufacturing things like toys in
America, whether people would be
interested in taking those manufacturing
jobs. And then finally, as you pointed
out, the goals are so confusing because
on the one hand, it seems like, all
right, it's about bringing manufacturing
back to the states, but on the other
hand, the Trump administration has said
that it's a way of raising revenue.
Yeah. as well. And then you have Trump
saying, "I'm gonna strike all these
deals." So deals are seen as a win for
him as well. But then if he needs to
raise revenue, is he actually going to
strike deals?
>> Totally. Well, anyway, there's a million
questions and we will have hundreds of
more episodes in our lifetime probably
that revolve around this topic. But I
think it's a good time to get some
perspective from the perspective of the
Chinese business community, Chinese
manufacturing and so forth, Chinese
policy, etc. and like how a lot of this
is being perceived from the Chinese
perspective and the response to the
aggressive actions.
>> Yeah. Because US policy isn't happening
in a vacuum, right? Like China is
reacting to it and you know sometimes
China can move pretty fast so we should
talk about it.
>> Totally. Well, I'm very excited to say I
think we do have the perfect guest. We
are going to be speaking with Cameron
Johnson. He is a senior partner at Title
Wave Solutions. He's based in Shanghai,
but he's temporarily here in the US
visiting us. Someone who has his finger
on the pulse of Chinese business and
manufacturing. Cameron, thank you so
much for coming on Loblot. Thanks for
having me, guys. It's great to be here
in New York with you.
>> What's Title Wave Solutions? What do you
do?
>> So, it's a boutique firm focused on
supply chain, manufacturing, advising,
consulting. Think if you're a business
that needs a supply chain map and a risk
assessment, maybe you need some
operational efficiencies, maybe you need
to understand the policy roadmap for the
next 5 years that the various
governments around the world are doing.
Those are some of the things that we
focus on
>> given recent events. How busy have you
actually been?
>> You know, interestingly enough, in
April, business was quite slow because
it it started off that we thought it was
going to be kind of a normal Q1 was
okay. April was kind of starting off to
be a normal year, but then when the
tariffs came in, everything stopped. And
so essentially in China, what you had is
you had a couple weeks where almost
nothing moved in the supply chains.
>> Uh Walmart came out
>> eventually and said, "Let's get some
stuff moving." And that kind of
unclogged things. But April was really
tough. And then after Geneva is kind of
the fire hose came on and everything and
everybody was how do we
>> move products around? How do we move
production around? How do we get talent
in different areas that we need to get
it into? So it's actually been quite a
rampage since then.
>> So we're recording this on July 16th and
I have to admit I don't know what the
tariff rate is on China these days. I
don't know where things stand in terms
of what the latest deadline is. I've
sort of lost track of it all like many
people in the market. A lot of this has
suddenly become noise. But I can ask on
July 16th from what's been announced so
far, whether it's tariffs or various
other actions, is the state of business
in China meaningfully different than it
was prior to April 2nd or would you say
mostly
things are kind of the same and
adjusting to uh different tariff rates?
Have there been some major shift in
flows or supply chain?
>> No, there hasn't been. What you do see
though is a lot of moving around of
pieces and parts. you know, toys,
furniture, these kinds of things. If
they were made in China before, they're
definitely not now. But that doesn't
necessarily mean you're pulling your
factories out. One of the things we have
seen is that a lot of companies now are
upskilling,
>> right? They they're going to put the
higher margin and higher level products
in China. They'll put the lower products
outside of China. Think of Vietnam
versus China. China can make any SKU you
want known demand essentially. Vietnam
can't make that many. So when you
actually look at the trade flows,
Vietnam produces far fewer SKUs and
ships them to the states. China ships it
to the rest of the world.
>> Wait, talk more about shifting I guess
lower quality production into other
areas because again a lot of people when
they think of China will still think of
basic goods manufacturing, right? When
in fact I think it's progressed quite a
lot since then.
>> It has. And often, you know, when you
look at kind of the last 10 years to a
short history when when the first trade
war came out, a lot of companies wanted
to do China plus one plus two, right?
You have a primary manufacturer in
China, then you have, you know, a sister
factory maybe in Southeast Asia, Latin
America, that kind of thing. What has
happened now is that those factories now
outside of China are also being
upskilled, but they're also being more
specialized. In China, you can still
upskill because of the local ecosystems
that offer you far more advantage than
anywhere else in the world, particularly
for certain products. you'll still keep
that and eat the margin within the
tariffs. But in other places, it gives
you more flexibility. So now if you're
in Vietnam, for example, sure you might
have a 20% tariff from the states, but
when you compare with China, you're
still getting that that margin and
you'll be okay. The reality is when you
actually look at what's happening
overall in the tariff schedules, it's a
mess. Nobody knows what's going on. And
in fact, we're hearing now that some
companies actually are reshoring
manufacturing back to China because when
you actually look at how the tariffs are
working 20% than supposedly 40% on the
trans shipment at 20% certain goods are
more competitive to maybe made in China
even with eating the tariffs. And
essentially it would go something like
>> Joe, you're making a certain type of
cup. Maybe it's a Christmas branded cup,
right? So you need a little bit more
specialized machinery, people, talent.
Okay, it's 50% from China, 20% from
Vietnam. It's difficult maybe to get in
Vietnam because they're not as
specialized. So here's Joe. You as the
manufacturer, you're going to go to the
packaging supplier who gives you your
cardboard and plastic. You're going to
go to your raw material supplier, you're
going to go to this to that, and you're
all going to ask them to take two or
three points off their sales to you. And
all of a sudden, that 55% or 50%
automatically becomes 20%. So that's how
companies in the granular are starting
to work around some of these challenges.
If I did have a Christmas cup that I
wanted to design right now, how quickly
could I have a manufactured product that
then couldn't ship? No, I'm serious.
>> Do you know there's a whole like
Christmas town in China that specializes
in Christmas good?
>> Sounds familiar. Could I have a cup by
this Christmas season?
>> You could have any cup of any design of
any material on demand.
>> How quickly?
>> Well, it depends on the design. It
depends how many parts of the process
you need. If you already have the
design, you have the CAD and everything,
you're looking at probably two months,
>> maybe less. If it's at scale, for
example, you want to shove every
Starbucks in the country, then of course
it would be much longer. But if you're
looking just for specialized runs, maybe
you're a company, right? You want to
Christmas giveaways for your staff,
maybe it's a couple hundred, couple
thousand, that you can do very quickly.
This is something that actually came up
in a previous episode with Sarah Laflur
where we were talking about apparel, but
I think it applies more broadly, but she
emphasized the importance of basically
just China's expertise in doing this and
the supply network that it's actually
built up. So if you are a foreign
investor or a US company or whatever and
you go to China, like immediately people
kind of know what to do now if you're
asking for a factory. So I'm curious, is
that replicable in a reasonable amount
of time by places like Vietnam?
>> It is. And you are seeing you are seeing
it being replicated overall. I argue
that supply chains aren't uh relocating,
but they're expanding and replicating.
So essentially, again, if you're a cut
producer in China, now you're going to
make it in Vietnam or Thailand. So you
have this now mini ecosystem. You go to
your different suppliers in China, you
say, "Hey, I need this product next to
me in Ho Chi Min. You need to figure out
how to get me that." Oh, this packaging
guy. Okay, you have a sister company
maybe in Hanoi. Okay, now I need to
figure out how to access that. So,
you're seeing the replication of supply
chains around the region. For example, I
look at supply chain ecosystems and 5G
components. The first is advanced
infrastructure. It's not just ports and
railroads. It's also things like 5G, the
electrical grid, sewers. Second is
talent and educational apparatus. Where
are you going to get the workers from?
But also, as things evolve, for example,
AI, how are you going to train them up
into these new areas? The third is
government support, which is kind of
obvious. The fourth is raw material
access and or the ability to process it.
When you actually look at what China
does, it doesn't have a lot of raw
materials, but it has expertise in the
processing. And the fifth is technology.
Now, China has this in most industries
across the board. The US has it for
example in aerospace. Europe does too.
But just in terms of so that's how I
evaluate a supply chain ecosystem. So
when I work with customers or even
policy makers and they say well what do
we what about Vietnam? I look at it in
context of those five key areas because
that will tell me where the gaps are and
where we need to actually improve.
>> Talk about that process. I mean, if
Vietnam had the talent to beat China, it
would be China or be at that scale. So,
obviously there's a gap and this is
something that's come up before. What
does All right, let's say there's a
Chinese company that makes X or Y. Let's
say they're making sporting goods or
something like that. They want to have
more production of the low-end in
Vietnam, but presumably there is still
some deficiency of some of these five
categories including infrastructure,
including access to raw materials. What
is their process for making it such that
given the gap between China and Vietnam
that that manufacturing in Vietnam does
become economical?
>> Uh well, part of it is uh again just the
lower SKU level, right? So if you look
at how hockey sticks, for example, are
produced, there's five levels of hockey
stick, the best to the to the worst, and
you have five different levels. And so
in that regard, you'll send a couple,
you know, probably level five and four,
maybe four and three to Vietnam to be
produced.
>> It sounds like you've had a hockey stick
client.
>> I've had multiple clients. Um,
>> but you know, ultimately, you look at
where you can get the largest amount of
volume, not just at the cheap, not at
the cheapest prices, but at the least
amount of problems,
>> right? If you're selling, let's say, a
level five hockey stick where, you know,
it's not NHL grade, the cost is going to
be lower and the tariffs actually hit
more and bite more. If you're making NHL
grade hockey sticks, which they do make
in China, it doesn't really matter what
the tariff is at that point because they
are expertise level. You have to have
that quality regardless. And so the
other thing Joe to your point about
China versus Vietnam and pretty much
China versus the rest of the world.
China has about 220 million workers in
manufacturing about 28% of its
population. Vietnam has 15 million about
30. Yeah.
>> And so the scale is equality all into
itself. And people just really don't
understand that the difference is not
just China moving forward in technology
and in different ways of doing business.
All of that is true. But it really is
just the massive scale of ability of
talent where you can call and say, "I
need a Christmas cup in 3 months." And
it doesn't matter what the size, shape,
or material is. They'll figure out how
to do it. And nobody else in the world
can do that.
[Music]
Tracy, it just clicked to me that
there's an interesting lesson here that
relates to the episode we did on snack
food warehouses in the US, which is that
with technological advance comes the
ability to have more SKUs. So, as
warehouses in the US got more
roboticized, the sheer variety that they
could hold at a given time made sense.
You can have robots go behind and pick
them out and so forth. And so it's
interesting to hear like about like skew
diversity as being this major sort of
gap between China versus the rest of the
world.
>> I'm smiling because you just reminded me
of pitos from that episode. Poss. The
pea cheetos.
>> Yeah, that's right. That's right.
>> Anyway, I better move on and stop
laughing because you'll get hungry.
>> I will.
>> And we don't have those in China, so I
don't know what those are.
>> Okay. But on this note, how do labor
costs actually fit into this entire
process? And can you maybe compare and
contrast Vietnam and China right now?
>> So labor costs, it really again it
really depends on the industry. For
example, if you work in certain
industries like composits, your labor
cost actually is a small component of
the overall cost. It really isn't the
materials, right? The maybe the carbon
or glass fibers, the resin systems, the
machinery. So it's not equivalent. What
you have to look at really is what's
worker productivity and efficiency
because at that point the cost really
doesn't matter as much particularly with
tariffs, right? The reason for tariffs
ultimately according to the US is they
want to reshore but they also want to
deal with Chinese overcapacity or
industrial policy. But the reality is in
Asia labor across the board is not as
important as it is such as I have this
ecosystem. I have access to cheaper raw
materials. I have plentiful electricity.
You know, one of the challenges in Asia
overall is just the stability of
electrical grid. And as China continues
to build out more and more of its own
electrical infrastructure, you're seeing
more of this actually play, for example,
a certain amount of I think it's about
20% of Vietnam's electricity ultimately
comes from China. And so you're seeing
more and more of the spillover. So it's
less about what is the cost per worker
because for example in China,
particularly with entry- level white
collar workers, 10 years ago, you might
have 25 to 30,000 R&B per month, which
is roughly $4 to $5,000. That would be
maybe your first entry- level job. Now
that level is half. And part of that is
because the economy is challenged.
There's more plentiful graduates every
year about 10 million. And at the same
time, businesses are just using them for
different things than they were in the
past. So labor is not it's a part of the
key component, right? It's part of that
key five key areas, the talent. You
definitely have to look at it, but
there's a lot of other parts in the
picture as well. How do uh the
governments of other Asian nations feel
about you know there's obviously anxiety
in the US about what the rise of Chinese
manufacturing which is an age-old story
means you know meant that we had the
China shock for American manufacturers
etc to the or European ones is there
similar anxiety among Malaysia for
example I don't know if they still make
the proton saga the car but you know
these countries have their own sort of
longtime national champions and so
forth. Do they feel anxiety about the
growing presence of Chinese power both
as imports but also just setting up a
shop at home?
>> Uh to some degree there's always a
hesitation but the reality is that the
counterbalance to that the United States
is not doing anything.
>> Sure. So for example, one of the one of
the things we've seen particularly in
the last couple of months is when you
talk about how is China versus the US.
For example, in Southeast Asia, Chinese
leaders are going all around Southeast
Asia talking to them about, hey, here's
the market opportunities. Here's what
we're looking at. The US is saying come
to DC and then we'll figure out what
we're going to do. They're very
different and there is a lot of
hesitation. You know, for example,
China, you know, my experience, I went
to Southeast Asia recently. They're
essentially discussing six key areas
with these different countries. The
first is Chinese firms will continue to
do FDI or investments in your countries.
American firms are not. American firms
are going to retrench to North America.
Think of Apple as a prime example. So
that basically takes away a key
component of US diplomacy and also
influence. Second is we have legions of
young educated workers. They're ready
and willing to go other places. They
want to work overseas. They want to get
that experience. Maybe they have better
job opportunities. The third is we can
share technology. And again, what people
look like there was a an article
yesterday about how China is restricting
technology. That's actually not what's
happening. If you want the technology of
2025, you're probably not going to get
it. But if you want the technology of
2023, no problem because we're a couple
generations ahead. So when you look at
what the discussions are in the region,
all you need is that because you're
probably at a 2020 or below in terms of
technology. You need those couple extra
steps to actually fuel your growth. The
fourth is there's still a lot of
commitment to do infrastructure in
region but it's not going to be a
barrier a belt and road kind of thing
but it will be hey you need certain
ports we'll work that we'll build those
out you need again maybe electrical
grids or uh railroads connected kuning
now down to Singapore those are the
things that you're going to start to see
more and more of because again they fuel
and countries are like listen I have to
have economic growth I have to be able
to continually raise the standard of my
people the fifth is there's a lot of
discussion and foreign minister Wangi We
had a discussion recently with the Azian
countries about doing more trade
agreements, free trade agreements with
Southeast Asia. And the sixth one, to
your point, and this is one in my most
recent trip to Southeast Asia. I had
never heard this before and I've been
going there since I was a kid.
>> Essentially, there's an understanding
that there are local manufacturing or
industries that are indigenous to these
countries and the Chinese are
acknowledging that we may not we're not
interested in blowing those up. Those
that's my interpretation,
>> but essentially that we're going to be
sensitive to local concerns. Now to your
point, does that mean it that happens in
all cases? I don't know. But the reality
is is that there is an understanding of
there's an opportunity here because the
US is withdrawing, but at the same time,
it's just not good business to make
people unhappy when we're doing
business.
>> You mentioned going to Washington and we
opened this discussion by talking about
how well we don't really know what the
tariffs are and I think it's difficult
for anyone who's trying to track them.
Now you mentioned that production is
already moving in response to this. Is
there any concern that like in 2 months
Trump is just going to reverse position
and the tariffs are going to go away or
be altered and that changes the economic
calculation for setting something up in
say Vietnam.
>> I think there's just a lack of
confidence overall of the direction
we're going and there's no clarity
whatsoever. And you're right, this kind
of back and forth it is but it isn't. It
is but it isn't. Supply chains take
probably 15 to 20 years to fully
develop. You may be able to build a
factory in a couple, but that again that
doesn't mean you have the raw materials,
the people, and the other key components
that you need to build out your
business. And so, yeah, it's not only
uncertain, but all these other countries
are going, China's not doing that to us.
I'll give you an example, Bangladesh,
right? Population larger than Russia.
They have a 0% tariff to China. They
have a 35% to the US.
>> So, which one do you think they're going
to prefer more? They're obviously going
to do more business with China. And
ultimately, this is the issue with the
tariffs. If the tariff was, listen, this
is the standard rate per country. Of
course, it fluctuates depending on
market need and so on. We want to have
more market access into your own
countries for American products. There's
a general understanding that that's
probably what could happen. Maybe not
perfect in all cases, but the reality is
is that the way it currently is, it
basically puts the US in a horrible
light. And the people who we need the
most are the ones who are suffering the
most. And how long do we think that's
really going to be able to last before
they're like, "That's enough. We're
going to go with the Chinese."
>> What does China import from Bangladesh?
Because my impression that is that China
just does not import that much period.
Not just from the US, but is not a big
importer of anything these days. In part
because of how much it's been able to
build out its domestic capacity in a
range of things.
>> Scrap metal maybe.
>> Yeah. You know, clothes, processed raw
materials, you know, and again, it's
>> China expansion 1.0 0 was kind of what
we had up until 2020. Meaning in the
country you're world class at most
everything you have. Now we're seeing
China 2.0 which is China for the world.
So it's less about Bangladesh selling to
China. It's more about as the Chinese
supply chains and supply chains in
general continue to evolve, replicate,
relocate. Now Bangladesh who wants a
piece of that supply chain puzzle.
That's what they want. And remember one
of the things that China's discussing
with Azion and Southeast Asia is market
access for your products back into
China. So you could have Chinese
manufacturers who move to Bangladesh
because maybe it is cheaper or they have
better raw material access for India for
cotton for example and then they could
produce it and sell it back into China.
So there's a lot of things that can
actually happen across the board with
supply chains that we haven't even
experienced yet.
>> Do you see anyone maybe shifting focus
Chinese companies shifting focus into
selling domestically in the domestic
market? Because of course that would
dovetail with one of the government's
key ambitions which is to try to boost
consumption in an economy where saving
has uh been pretty uh traditional.
>> We do see some shift to that but
domestic demand overall is not
fantastic. There's a lot of hangover
from the co years. Some western products
are still seen as a better option than
Chinese products. And also China
historically is a saving nation. The
Chinese are never going to buy like the
Americans ever. And this is one of the
actually debates I have with economists
who say they need to buy more. Sure. But
what does that actually mean? What is
the actual rate you have to hit? Because
if you expect them to do a US rate,
that's never going to happen. So you do
see people and companies are still
spending on machinery upgrades. They're
still buying iPhones and Huawei's and iT
spending like Americans would spend. and
they're saving more than they used to.
Again, I would argue a lot of that's
from the co years, but it's also has to
do with other challenges inside the
country, the social welfare uncertainty,
these kinds of things as the population
gets older.
>> Actually, talk about what is the sort of
debate that's happening in China with
regards to this idea of so-called
Chinese over capacity because American
econ economists love to talk about this.
Sometimes it feels like cope to me. It's
like, oh, we can't compete, therefore
they must be cheating, right? Therefore,
they must be flooding our market because
they have this over capacity. On the
other hand, you do see comments from
leaders in Beijing from time to time
talking about the provinces engaging in
unhelpful, unproductive race to the
bottom competition between each
province's champion, etc. Explain to us
like how this question of quote
overcapacity is sort of metabolized in
China.
>> Well, over capacity is very much in the
eye of the beholder. If you're a
consumer, in many cases, you love over
capacity because prices keep going down,
>> right? I I think you're right. Part of
it is is that when you actually look at
the buildout of initiatives and like a
5-year plan structure, a lot of it is we
need to do X, Y, and Z. You know, we
need to have more AI data centers. We
need to have more EV companies. And so,
different regional governments or
champions will undertake those
initiatives. And so, that ultimately
will contribute to a buildout of the
overcapacity argument. I think the other
thing to realize is that we actually
look at how a lot of this is done. It's
done in a way to figure out how to build
out an ultimate supply chain, not an end
product. Here we want to make a Ford
truck. Great. That's the goal. But in
China, it's actually reversed. How do we
actually figure out how to make a
million Xiaomi cars every year? Well,
first you have to figure out how to deal
with the raw materials, the battery
suppliers, or the different part
suppliers and so on. So, it's actually a
full breakdown. So the overcapacity
actually isn't just in the final
product. Yeah. It's in all the ancillary
products in the tier 1, third, fourth,
fifth, sixth, seventh suppliers as well
throughout the entire country. Now it's
not the same in all industries. I don't
want your listeners to get the wrong
idea, but you take for example EVs. The
leaders in EVs are not the SOEs, they're
all the private companies. And so one of
the significant shifts we've seen in
China is that the S so ses and the
traditional automotive manufacturers had
now have a far less not just dominant
position but influence in the market.
It's all the private companies generally
and so is that over capacity that's what
definitely one of the overhangs for sure
and one of the challenges you know I was
just in Europe last week and this is one
of the debates I keep having with them.
you were fine with over capacity for
Germany and Japan and they ultimately
they're they're exported more much more
every year than whatever China does. Now
that the Chinese do it you have a you
have an issue it's like come on guys
like you can't have everything. The
other thing is is that in many cases
this is how you develop worldclass
technology for example in EVs is you
have this intense this nuan this
extremely intense internal competition
because that's what was the word you
used
>> nuan it's internal basically fierce
internal competition right there's
another interesting word that has come
out a lot particularly because of the
recent moves with the H20s is called
chabodza basically meaning you're
strangling us and so the Chinese have
used this in terms of the Americans
saying Hey, you're strangling our
industry with semiconductor controls and
everything else and now there's a new
discussion about the new chab in China
is oh we have rare earths so now we can
also do it right so and this is kind of
an interesting when you talk about over
capacity
>> part of my discussion when you look at
supply chains it really depends on the
supply chain but also where it is
>> for example over capacity is great if
you're Australia because you're getting
cheap automotive cars out of China right
the Japanese don't like it because
they're losing market share as an
example so where does it actually work
out one of the interesting things about
overcapacity is it's not just over
capacity again in the final product it's
the entire supply chain so this is one
of the things that's contributing to
China global in China because of this
nan this fierce internal competition
companies a lot of them cannot make very
much money if any so they have to go out
so what you're seeing now as they go out
they're building supply chains BYD is a
perfect example they're actually
bringing that entire ecosystem with them
so while it may be over capacity inside
China the benefits to other parts of the
ecosystem outside of China is now you
got access to cheaper technology and
products overall that you can build
locally.
>> I have so many questions I have to focus
but okay net net would you say that the
crackdown on Chinese technology has
accelerated China's technological
development or hindered it? I'd say it's
definitely accelerated it because again
referring to those five parts of the
supply chain ecosystem earlier it
essentially focused everything in the
entire country and all the companies
into this we have to figure out how to
make this work right because it's now
it's an existential threat to our
businesses the one thing I've learned
since I've been in China as a kid never
focus the Chinese on a problem because
they will attack and kill that problem
and with that you also see the
expenditure of massive amounts of
resources and it is very intensive it is
sometimes waste But the end result is
pretty clear. You have worldclass
companies and technology.
>> Speaking of resources, so one thing I
remember from my time in Hong Kong was
the Chinese government cracked down on
education companies and what they termed
wasteful capital. And they basically
came out and said they wanted to
encourage more money to go into
high-tech businesses.
>> Is that still happening? And then also,
do you see money, government money,
maybe lending standards being eased up
for other industries? Basically, is
China using financing to encourage other
types of industries to be able to like
expand, go abroad, things like that.
>> So, they're not necessarily using
financing like, hey, here's an import
export bank for you, such as the US, for
example, with Boeing. What they are
doing though is particularly on on you
know with different incentives think AI
for example they are providing the
entire ecosystem different levels of
support maybe that support is some
finance maybe the support is a guarantee
of we'll buy x amount of your product
over x number of years maybe it's we're
going to work with universities to tweak
and change our educational program so we
can actually train the new engineers in
terms of a more effective way to go into
business that's where we see the changes
10 years ago it would be more financial
stimulus financial incentives going out
into tax incentives and so on going into
the system. But now we're seeing these
tweaks and changes because they
understand that money isn't everything.
You also have to build out all these
other components to actually move
forward in an industry.
[Music]
Talk to us about AI. You know, obviously
we had a the Deep Seek moment that was
just earlier this year. Kind of feels
like ancient history. Have you tried
Kimmy yet? Have you heard of this one?
There's some company called Moonshot and
they have a new model called Kimmy
>> and some people are saying it's better
than Deep Seek. I'm not sure. So,
>> have you tried it?
>> Yeah. You know, they all kind seemed
fine. It seemed very good. You know,
they all kind of look the same. But how
does the AI race look for we know how it
looks from the perspective of your
deepseat moments etc. What does the AI
race look like in China?
>> You know it's interesting. Um it really
depends on who you talk to but my
personal belief is that China's ahead in
AI and it's not even close. When you
look at
>> yeah when you look at when you look at
the deepseek moment it was a watershed
but there's 100 deepseek equivalents
that are coming online. We've only seen
10 of them
>> right? All right. I don't know what the
equivalents are in the states,
>> but when you look at again things like
infrastructure, China has copious
amounts of electricity they can build
out. They're constantly building out
their electricity grid.
>> Last year in 2024, they had 380 gawatts
built out. The US only had 60 or maybe
80, I don't remember off the top of my
head, but essentially that gives them a
huge runway to build out all of these
AI, all of these data centers, the
talent. I was at the semiconductor show
in Shanghai at the end of March and they
had a booth there semiu and essentially
this the goal of this organization is to
help young graduates get into the fields
of the future. Last year when I talked
to them it was very much oh we're trying
to help young graduates get internships
and introductions. This year it was hey
we're going to have 100,000 graduates go
into five key industries. AI, quantum
computing, robotics, semiconductors and
batteries. Now, a 100,000 per year,
that's more than all of the Western
world combined. By the end of the
decade, they want to have half a
million. That's more than the entire
world combined. And when you actually
look at how China is building out again
in this AI situation, and I'll sidestep
a minute, when you just look at battery
chemistry,
>> yeah,
>> China has 50 graduate programs of
battery chemistry and metallergy in it.
The US doesn't really have that. They
have a couple professors. And so when
you look at again the talent, the
government support, it's not just, hey
guys, we want to use AI. It's every kid
in the country now from kindergarten all
the way on up. I mean, even my own kids
now, they are mandated starting this
fall to have AI education. The entire
apparatus in the whole country. And so
again, when you look at these different
areas, I'm like, hey, wait a minute,
guys. Like this is not comparable. I'll
give you an example. I was in uh
southern China at a consumer goods
manufacturer who I've known and I do
work with. They have DeepSeek in the
factory. They have five factories in
China, a couple Southeast Asia. I'm
like, why do you who make consumer why
do you have Deep Seek? And he goes,
Cameron, we have a lot of different
products and we want to figure out how
to use it. We have over 100 R&D and
technical guys. Business is slow because
consumer goods in the trade war. I'm
trying to have them figure out while we
have the time how to use it. So, I go
talk to the technology team. The
technology team is talking to the entire
supply chain how to use DeepSseek and
these different programs to do more
efficient business and solve problems.
So he shows me his WeChat system. He's
got hundreds of people in a WeChat
group. They're plastic providers.
They're raw material producers, the
packaging guys. And there's like, oh
yeah, they'll say, you know, I looked at
the the WeChat feed. Oh, this didn't
work. Try this. Do that. I don't know
what this means. What are you seeing
here? was the entire supply chains are
having this massive compounding
knowledge throughout all of it from the
raw material producer all the way down
to the final component manufacturer the
OEM then he says by the way this is now
happening in Vietnam and Thailand
because there it's a lot of Chinese
management and now their suppliers which
are Vietnamese are Thai so you're seeing
this massive compound throughout all of
the supply chains and that's just one
company Joe is Boeing doing that is Dowo
Chemical doing that is BMW doing that I
would argue no and this is why in my And
China is very far ahead in the AI race.
People look at it as we have
breakthroughs, we have this and that.
And that's absolutely true. The US is
100% ahead in that. But I call it the
metaphysical versus the tangible. The US
and the West is going to be great at the
metaph metaphysical discoveries and
everything else.
>> We're going to build the digital god
first.
>> That's right. The technology and the
adaptation and the integration is all
going to be Chinese.
>> Joe, this is kind of depressing from a
US perspective.
>> I mean, I've been depressed forever.
>> Okay. Um,
>> I was born depressed. I I wouldn't go
there.
>> No, you weren't.
>> No, I wasn't.
>> Joe is generally a happy person, I
think.
>> You mentioned young people and the
education system quite a bit here, but I
imagine
this is still a shift in the labor
force, right? So, if more factory jobs
are going from China to Vietnam, that
means fewer factory jobs domestically.
How does all of this, the trade war, the
responses from private companies in
China, how does that play into domestic
politics at a time when there's been a
lot of anxiety within China about things
like youth unemployment?
>> It unifies it more than disunifies it.
Um because again, it gives them a focus.
We need to stand up against the attacks
that we're receiving. It's actually
having the opposite effect in many ways.
I think the other thing is people
understand that the industry of today is
not going to be the industry of
tomorrow. So we have to upskill, we have
to train our workers, we have to
automate more. If we do have a part or
component that really just isn't
profitable for us, we can send it to
Southeast Asia and it will be
profitable. So we need to explore that.
So you're seeing there different ways
that they can attack that problem.
I have one more question and I'm also
worried it's going to be sort of leading
to a depressing answer, but I think it
was 2049 that Deng Xiaopang targeted for
like, okay, by 2049 we'll have achieved
a modern socialist state, maybe a modern
communist state or something like that.
And it seems like one way you could get
there is just like have robots do
everything. And I know there's a lot of
investment in China in humanoid
robotics, which if you could really have
a, you know, a robot that more or less
moved like a person, pretty incredible
productivity gains. There's efforts here
obviously and Tesla's in that space. Can
you talk a little bit about like the
state of the Chinese humanoid robotics
industry, their contribution to
essentially reducing the burdens of
human labor and what the sort of
competitive vision for that industry is?
>> I think the competitive the competitive
vision is still being built out because
again we don't know exactly what they
can and can't do. For example, humanoid
robots will be great at repetitive
tasks, whether they're on an assembly
line or maybe it's I have
>> I saw a video of a full-ervice gasoline
station where the robot filled up the
tank.
>> Sure. I mean, again, those are
repetitive. You can only program them
for a certain number of variables. But
things like, you know, when I was
working in carbon fiber, we did a lot of
textile production where you had to
essentially thread very thin fibers into
eyelet holes to feed into the machine.
that will be done by humans for a very
long time because it's a very com it
seems simple but it's actually very
complex. We have to line everything up,
tie everything in accurately and so on.
I think the area to look at for robotics
in general is again do you have the
supply chain ecosystem?
>> Yeah.
>> And China has that from all the way from
the raw material processing for example
for the magnets all the way down into
the installation. And that's why
ultimately again given where we are
currently China will continue to grow
ahead. It's great that Tesla does it.
They absolutely should. competition is
better for everybody, but you still get
your magnets from China. Now, will that
become a problem in the future? Maybe
not, maybe it will. I think that's to be
debated. Ultimately, when you look at
how it will affect society, we just
don't know. I think the one thing to
look at though is as they continue to
grow the supply chain ecosystems in
these areas and regardless of industry,
whether it's robotics, it's
semiconductors, it's making paper, the
reality is is because you have all of
that in your country, you can tinker
with it a lot better than other places
in the world. So when you actually talk
about the innovation advancements and
the ability to tinker on the fly, which
China is world class at, it's often
because they have all the different
pieces and component parts. You talked
about the Christmas city earlier. And
that's because you can get everything
for Christmas in that city. You can get
the screws, you can get the tinsel, you
can get a color red, you can get a pink,
whatever it may be. And all of that
because that ecosystem exists there. It
gives you far more flexibility in the
future to build something out. Joe, how
do you think New Jersey would respond to
gas pumping robots?
>> Oh, yeah.
Probably could go either way. It could
go either way. Like, is the required
full service gas a benefit for the
workers or is it just a guaranteed
benefit for the drivers? Can I say my
guilty
>> play my guilty thought, which is that
like I like getting gasoline in New
Jersey. Sure. you know, like, yeah, I
like being lazy and I like having an
because if I'm not like in New Jersey,
I'll pump it myself to save the money.
But I like having an excuse like, oh,
you know, I had to do it and then I just
get to sit in my car. So, I don't
complain.
>> That's not that bad, Joe. Um, not that
guilty. I have just one more question
and it's a really basic one, but maybe
you could walk us through or at least
give us some color on how the actual
paperwork works for these tariffs, like
the hoops that companies are having to
jump through in order to get goods to
the US given that the tariff rate seems
to change day by day. I would refer them
to my best customs broker because I
don't I don't deal with that because
particularly to your point because it's
constantly changing and evolving. The
rules are changing.
>> One day you can't move H20 chips and the
next day you can, right? One day you
don't have any rear earth, the next day
you can, but they're still tariffed and
taxed and but at what rate are they
tariff and tax? Because if you get it
out of Southeast Asia, it's now a
different tariff rate than China, but
they both come from China. How does that
actually work? The reality is it's so
complex now that hire a professional
because that's what I do. Well, I guess
I'll ask you one more question then and
it relates to the very beginning of the
conversation about Chinese manufacturers
building out more of their supply chain
in Vietnam and other Asian countries.
And one of the things you hear about is
we have to guard against so-called like
trans shshipment which I just take to
mean there's something made in China and
then it stops for a cup of coffee in
Vietnam and then puts on another boat
and suddenly you know it's a disguised
important made to look like Vietnam. It
sounds like though the vision is that
that just becomes irrelevant or that
that's an unnecessary thing that
actually it is a Chinese company but
it's actually made in Vietnam and that
ultimately the idea of like trans
shipment the idea of just like something
passing through Vietnam is like a
temporary thing but in the end it will
just be made in Vietnam and that the
companies and that the vision is not to
use Vietnam as a pass through the vision
is to use Vietnam as the source.
>> No, you're correct. I think the issue
with trans shshipment is the definition
that is used now is very 2018. It's not
really what's happening.
>> Of course, it still happens on occasion.
I'm not denying that. But when you
actually look at what's happening, it's
the raw materials and semi-processed
intermediate goods that are coming into
Vietnam and then being processed and
moved on. Now, at what point is that
Vietnamese versus Chinese, you know,
that actually is the debate that nobody
knows the answer to and we haven't
received guidance on from the government
about what that actually is. Is it x
amount of content like it it has been
the MSCA or is it something else? We
don't know.
>> You know, one of the things you hear and
we've talked about this on the podcast
is that anyone who's been in China for
10, 20, 30 years has seen extraordinary
advances in standard of living over this
period of time. I've never been to
Vietnam. Given all this investment,
would someone who's uh 40 years old in
Vietnam today or younger like in the
last 10 years, would you say the quality
of life and the quality of
infrastructure is massively changed in
some of these other countries?
>> Yeah, I I would say that it's also that
the standard of living, the job
opportunities, right? Are the
government's going to have more money in
their coffers for social services
because they have better taxation
because there is more money coming in.
All of that is improved across the board
in the region. Absolutely. I actually
have one last question, which is this
isn't the first time that we've seen the
US impose tariffs on China. Obviously,
in the first Trump administration, we
had restrictions, although clearly not
as stringent as they are now. I kind of
think of them as like maybe practice
tariffs for China. So, I'm curious, what
was the most surprising thing that you
learned or witnessed or saw from the
first round of tariffs?
>> From the original trade war tariffs.
>> Yeah.
>> I think the thing that I was most
surprised at is that the US didn't
understand that it's basically squeezing
a balloon. If you squeeze them out of
China, they'll go somewhere else, but
particularly to Southeast Asia. And that
by doing that, the calculus of ABC
anywhere but China has now actually
cemented Chinese influence in Southeast
Asia. And it will never we'll never go
back to the opposite, particularly with
what we're currently doing. And so the
surprising things are more for me as on
the US side of strategically how do we
think about these things and how do we
forecast out 5 10 15 20 years is that
even if that was a consideration, it
really wasn't given much credence. Those
are the things that surprised me more.
Of course, a company if they're tariffed
is going to go outside and build
somewhere else. Of course, companies
that have internal intensive competition
are going to want to go to new markets
where they can make more profits. That's
going to happen that's business. But
when you actually look at geopolitics
and the evolution of geopolitics,
particularly in regards to China, if you
again, if you try to force China into a
situation, you're not going to expect
the outcome, right? And the outcome in
this particular case of trade war 1.0 is
it cemented Chinese influence in
Southeast Asia. The outcome of trade war
2.0, although we don't know it, is
essentially now cementing China's lead
in supply chains in Asia, Africa, and
Europe.
>> We're going to get really freaked out in
this country when it's LAM when it's
like in our hemisphere. And it's
>> they're already being freaked out. And I
mean, the reality is that when you talk
to Chinese businesses, particularly
private businesses outside of China,
they know that they have to abide by
local rules. And so one of the things
that has been most surprising to me is
that the US doesn't encourage more
Chinese firms particularly in industries
where we have to have the technology
battery and so on.
>> Come here. not just come here but you do
it our way right 51% JV versus 49%
>> an American has to be in charge all data
silo you know there are certain things
you can do that are low hanging fruit
and one of the arguments that I use
often is for example with these advanced
supply chains for example with EVs China
Chinese firms China has invested
hundreds of billions of dollars in the
last 20 years developing this out why
does the US or Europe want to spend the
same it's stupid
>> if you want to build it out invite them
to do it pay them the royalty fee,
whatever it comes out to. Take the
technology and then fork it and make it
indigenous. So instead of 20, 10 years,
20 years behind, now you're two. That's
a much different conversation. And these
are things to your point, Tracy, that we
just don't see whether we're not taking
advantage.
>> Cameron Johnson, thank you so much for
uh coming on. That was a fascinating uh
conversation.
>> Thanks for having me, guys.
>> Fascinating and depressing. Thank you.
[Music]
Well, that was certainly a very
fascinating conversation. I mean,
there's a lot to pick up from. This idea
that China is ahead in AI and that it's
not particularly close is like a really
interesting contention. Yes, it's an
interesting contention because I think
here in the US the way people talk about
AI is that this is still an area where
we maintain some semblance of a quote
lead unquote.
>> Yeah. I also thought well I guess the
emphasis on the sort of like iterative
process of Chinese companies was
important because China does have this
like background of taking a particular
piece of technology or a way of doing
things and then improving on it. So it
seems like maybe AI just kind of speeds
that up or maybe AI itself is a place
where it can kind of deploy that
strategy. The other thing I was thinking
about is
>> just the importance of the supply
network that Cameron was emphasizing and
how difficult it is to replicate that.
Like could you imagine
>> a Christmas village in the US?
>> No. And or a shoe town and town and all
of these things.
>> No. It's almost impossible to imagine.
You know, I think this is something
we've talked about Sam Demiko of Impulse
Labs. You know, the idea that the supply
chain is the product, right? And I think
hearing him talk about over capacity as
in it's not about the cap over capacity
of end products per se. It's about that
over capacity to the extent that that is
a meaningful lens of the entire the
entire chain, right? And all the
different suppliers. I thought that was
like a really interesting idea. You
know, another thing that I think is
important and it sounds trivial, but
setting aside the cost of labor until we
have perfect humanoid robotics, there is
no substitute for population, right? And
so just the fact that the sheer number
of workers, whether we're talking
potentially factory workers or the sheer
number of STEM graduates, which to some
extent might be about educational
priorities, but to another extent is
also just going to be about the sheer
number of people in the world. It ends
up being a meaningful qualitative
difference.
>> What was the stat that Cameron threw
out? A 100,000 STEM graduates or
something per year.
>> Yeah. Like more
>> more than all the western countries
combining
multiple battery majors and the US
doesn't have any just anyway. I don't
know.
>> We got to go to Shoe City.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the
OddLots podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest
Cameron Johnson. He's cam Johnson.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
Carmen Arman Dashelbennet at Dashbot and
Kalebrooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLotss content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlotss
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
all of these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
And if you enjoy our thoughts, if you
want us to go to China to visit Shoe
City, then please leave us a positive
review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]